CAREGIVER ENGAGEMENT PHASES
The Caregiver Engagement Phases are mutually exclusive. For each phase, consider the adult’s facial expressions, direction of gaze, and vocalizations.
1.	Negative Engagement (Cneg): The adult is negative, withdrawn, intrusive or hostile. His/her facial expressions are sad, sober, expressionless, stern, angry or hostile. There are no smiles or hints of smiles. The adult’s vocalizations are expressionless, sharp, angry, loud or adultlike. The adult may be silent or speak in a monotone. The adult may be leaning back in his/her chair and appear at a loss of what to do. There is no burst-pause, sing-song, or exaggerated language characteristic of motherese. When considering the adult’s vocalizations, pay attention to the affective tone of the vocalizations and disregard the content of the vocalizations. There is no gaze criterion.

According to the main affect negative Engagement can be divided into three specific phases: Withdrawn, Intrusive and Hostile. Always try to code whether the adult is in the Withdrawn, Intrusive or Hostile phase. If it is not possible to make this differentiation, code the undifferentiated category of Negative Engagement. If Intrusive and Hostile behavior can be observed at once, code Hostile.
2.	Withdrawn (Cwit): The adult is minimally engaged and withdrawn with the baby. The adult’s facial expressions are sad, flat, or expressionless. There are no smiles or hints of smiles. The adult may be silent, speak or whisper in a flat or expressionless monotone. The adult may be leaning back in his/her chair, not touch the baby or touch it in a mechanical manner, and appear hesitant or at a loss of what to do. There is no burst pause, sing-song, or exaggerated vocalizations (i.e., motherese). There is no gaze criterion.

3.	Intrusive (Cint, main affect „Tension /Agitation“, videos: 43, A1-076): The adult’s engagement with the baby is characterized by intrusive affect/behavior. The adult’s facial expressions are tense, stressed or little authentic. The infant is not given the chance to respond to maternal initiatives as these follow one another too fast and do not await infant reactions. Maternal and infant reactions are not well-matched so that for example the mother interrupts the infant’s activities in order to pursue her own
„programme“. The mother stimulates the infant excessively without caring about infant signals of discomfort and/or withdrawal. Regardless of the infant’s behavior the mother acts too loud, too expressively and too close to her child. The infant’s activities are restrained, for example by turning his or her face around in order to make eye contact, by holding tight hands or feet while playing etc.

4.	Hostile (Chos, main affect „Anger/Hostility/Petulance “, videos: 21, 48): The adult’s en-gagement with the baby is characterized by hostile affect/behavior. The adult’s facial ex-pressions are stressed out, upset or aggressive. Vocalizations are high pitched or the voice is cracking. The mother is curt with the baby, pushes him/her, drags or pulls him/her or her actions and vocalizations follow one another staccato-like. She makes fun of her baby, for example by imitating his/her vocalizations or mimic expressions.
 
5.	Non-Infant Focused Engagement (Cnon): The adult is not attending to the baby and is involved in a non-infant focused activity (e.g., fixing his/her clothing, talking to the exper-imenter, looking at an object the infant is not looking at, rubbing eyes and face because of tiredness).

5.	Social Monitor/No Vocs or Neutral Vocs (Cneu): The adult watches or focuses his/her attention on the baby or the baby’s activities while his/her facial expressions are neutral. The caregiver may look interested in the infant and may occasionally show a hint of a smile. The adult may touch the baby. The adult can be silent or vocalize to the baby in a neutral manner. Do not code brief conversational pauses (no vocs with neutral face) as 6 unless these pauses last 2 seconds or more. Comforting sounds like shhh are coded as 6. If the caregiver’s face is neutral but he/she is speaking in Motherese or in a positive tone of voice, score Phase 7 Social Monitor/Positive Vocs. In cases where it is difficult to differentiate between the Negative Engagement codes (particularly Withdrawn) and Social Monitor/No Vocs or Neutral Vocs, score a 6. Similarly if it is difficult to differentiate between Social Monitor/Neutral and Social Monitor/Positive Vocs, score Social Monitor/No Vocs or Neutral Vocs.

6.	Social Monitor/Positive Vocs (Cpvc): The caregiver's gaze is focused on the infant or on the infant’s activities. His/her facial expressions are neutral, interested, and may occasionally show a hint of a smile. Although the caregiver’s face is neutral, his/her vocalizations are positive (e.g., he/she may use Motherese, make kissing or clicking sounds, sing). In cases where it is difficult to differentiate between Social Monitor/Positive Vocs and Social Positive Engagement, score Social Monitor/Positive Vocs.
7.	Social Positive Engagement (Cpos): The caregiver expresses positive affect such as full smiles (closed or open), laughter, or play faces. The adult may vocalize to the baby using Motherese or sing but there is nothing exaggerated in his/her speaking or singing. The caregiver may play games with the infant but these games do not have a neutral quality (code 6 or 7). Instances when vocalizations (e.g., "boop") make it physically impossible to smile are coded as 8 if they are preceded by an 8. If the "boop" is preceded by a neutral face, code a 7. If, after the vocalization, the caregiver's face is not positive (e.g., neutral), code the appropriate code. Similarly, if the caregiver covers his/her face or hides his/her face in the infant's body, code these instances as 8 if they are preceded by an 8. If the caregiver emerges with a non-positive face (e.g., neutral or negative), code the appropriate code.

8.	Unscorable (Cusc): If the adult’s face is obscured because of poor camera angles or technical problems score Unscorable. Code all instances, however brief if the caregiver's face is completely obscured and if it is not possible to hear the caregiver's vocalizations. If it is possible to see part of the caregiver's face, code the appropriate engagement phase. Also, if you cannot see the face but can hear the caregiver talk using neutral or positive vocalizations, code 6 or 7. Do not guess.
 