INFANT ENGAGEMENT PHASES
The infant engagement phases are mutually exclusive. The phases combine information from the infant's facial expressions, direction of gaze, body posture and vocalizations.
1.	Negative Engagement (Ineg): The infant is negative, protesting or withdrawn. The infant must display negative facial expressions (e.g., anger, sadness, disgust, distress, cry or grimace faces), and/or whimpering, complaining, fussy, or crying vocalizations. There is no gaze criterion and a variety of gestural and postural behaviors may occur (e.g., pushing the caregiver away, twisting and turning in chair, arching body).
Negative Engagement can be divided into two specific phases: Protest and Withdrawn. Always try to code whether the infant is in a Protest or Withdrawn phase. If it is not possible to make this differentiation, code the undifferentiated category of Negative Engagement. The overall feel for this code is unhappy or sad without the further differentiation of the Protest or Withdrawn codes [In typical populations, Protest will be the most common negative code and Withdrawn will be rare].

2.	Protest (Ipro): The infant is protesting. The infant often displays facial expressions of anger, frustration, grimaces, and/or is fussing or crying. The infant tends to be active during this phase: the infant may arch his/her back, kick or bang his/her arms against the chair, try to escape /get away, gesture, want to be picked up, bat at the caregiver, or push and pull away from the caregiver. This code captures externalizing type behaviors, and can have an angry or hostile aspect. There is no gaze criterion.
3.	Withdrawn (Iwit): The infant is withdrawn and minimally engaged with the caregiver. This phase often includes sad facial expressions, whimpering vocalizations, slumped posture, listless demeanor, and gaze aversion. The infant typically engages in few activities and gives the impression of being “spaced out” and disengaged from the caregiver. This code captures internalizing type behaviors. Although the infant often gaze averts, there is no specific gaze criterion defining this phase. Do not code withdrawn if the infant is crying or looking away from the caregiver but is focused on an object.

4.	Object/Environment Engagement (Inon): The infant is looking at objects that are either proximal (e.g., infant seat) or distal (e.g., camera). The infant may manipulate proximal objects. The infant’s eyes must be directed towards an object. The infant’s facial expressions are typically interested or neutral but may be on occasion positive. The infant may or may not vocalize. Objects include the infant’s hands, feet, belly or clothing; the caregiver’s body (e.g., trunk, hands, jewelry); and objects that are part of the laboratory setting (e.g., chair strap, side of the chair, cameras or curtains). The caregiver’s face does not constitute an object. If the infant displays negative affect or vocalizations while looking at an object, code Negative Engagement, Protest or Withdrawn. If the infant laughs or smiles while looking at an object, code Object/Environment Engagement not Social Positive Engagement (ipos).

5.	Social Monitor (Ineu): The infant’s attention is directed towards the caregiver. The infant looks at the adult’s face with a neutral or interested facial expression. The infant’s eyes must be oriented towards the adult’s face and he/she may vocalize in a neutral/positive manner. In cases where it is difficult to differentiate between Negative
 
Engagement (particularly withdrawn) and Social Monitor, score Social Monitor. Similarly, if it is difficult to differentiate between Social Monitor and Social Positive Engagement, score Social Monitor. If it is difficult to differentiate between Object Engagement and Social Monitor, score Object Engagement.

6.	Social Positive Engagement (Ipos): This scale assesses the extent to which the infant is engaged with the caregiver in an overall positive manner. The infant must display facial expressions of joy particularly smiles, but occasionally coo and play faces. The infant must look towards the caregiver’s face. The infant may be vocalizing in a positive manner, laughing, babbling, or squealing. Do not code Social Positive Engagement if the infant vocalizes but does not display a smile face. A smile face includes upturned mouth, crinkly eyes and raised cheeks. The infant may be engaged with the adult in rhythmic social play-games (e.g., pat-a-cake, peek-a-boo). During these games it may not be possible for the infant to look directly at the adult’s face because of the caregiver’s position (e.g., adult’s face buried in infant’s lap) or the nature of the game (e.g., face covered in peek-a-boo). Score these instances as Social Positive Engagement as long as the infant’s facial and/or vocal expressions are positive and gaze is focused towards the caregiver.

7.	Sleep (Islp): The infant is asleep.
8.	Unscorable (Iusc): If the baby’s face is obscured because of poor camera angles, technical problems, or because the adult is blocking the baby’s camera, score Unscorable. If it is possible to see part of the infant's face, code the appropriate engagement phase. Do not guess. In general, use the following rules to code Unscorable. Even though the infant's face is blocked, if it is clear that the infant is looking away from the mother, score Object/Environment Engagement. If the infant's face is obscured and the infant is fussing or crying, score the appropriate Negative Engagement code. If the infant's face is obscured and the infant seems to be looking in the direction of the mother, score Unscorable because it will be impossible to know exactly where the infant is looking or to determine the infant's facial expression. However, if the infant does not move and is in the same coding behavior from the beginning of being obscured to being observable then score that coding behavior.
A note on the use of pacifiers: The use of pacifiers is problematic because they obscure the baby's mouth. Use the following rules if a pacifier is in use: Code Social/Positive Engagement if it is CLEAR that the baby is smiling (e.g., the cheeks are clearly raised even with the pacifier). If this is not clear, use the default rule and code Social Monitor (but only if the baby is looking at the parent). If the baby is crying/fussing with a pacifier in the mouth, code the appropriate Negative Engagement code. If the baby is looking away from the caregiver and is not crying/fussing, score Object/Environment Engagement. If the baby is looking away and fussing/crying, code the appropriate Negative Engagement code.

A note on SNEEZING: If the infant sneezes and involuntarily closes his/her eyes, append the sneezing fit to the previous code. For example, if the infant looks at an object, sneezes, and then smiles at the mother, code a 4 and a 6. If the infant looks at an object, sneezes and continues to look at an object, code a continuous 4.
 